.TH SLACKER 8 "June 2026" "slacker 0.9.0" "Slackware Package Management"
.SH NAME
slacker \- minimal package manager for Slackware (slackpkg + slackpkg+ in one)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B slacker
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B slacker
manages Slackware packages over the network, combining the behaviour of
.BR slackpkg (8)
with the multi\-repository support of slackpkg+. It is a thin layer over the
native Slackware package tools: it never reimplements
.BR installpkg (8),
.BR upgradepkg (8)
or
.BR removepkg (8),
but resolves packages across one or more repositories and calls those tools to
make changes.
.PP
Every configured repository \(em the official Slackware mirror and any external
(slackpkg+\-style) repositories alike \(em is held in a single priority\-ordered
model. When the same package name is offered by several repositories, the one
from the highest\-priority repository wins. A specific repository can be forced
with the
.I repo:package
syntax.
.PP
.B slacker
resolves dependencies from per\-package
.I .dep
files when a repository provides them, pulling in any missing dependencies from
the same repository before installing. This is on by default and can be turned
off globally with
.B RESOLVE_DEPS=no
or per run with
.BR \-\-no\-deps " (see " DEPENDENCIES ")."
.PP
For the full guide \(em configuration, the priority model, security and worked
examples \(em see the project wiki at
.UR https://forge.slackware.nl/rizitis/slacker/wiki
.UE .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-dir " DIR"
Directory holding the plain\-text configuration files. Default
.IR /etc/slacker .
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Assume "yes" to confirmation prompts.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would happen without changing the system.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-deps
Do not read
.I .dep
files or pull in dependencies for this run.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Metadata
.TP
.B update \fR[\fBgpg\fR]
First checks every active repository for changes (cheaply: the official repo by
its ChangeLog, the others by comparing CHECKSUMS.md5) and prints a status table.
If nothing has changed it stops with \fIAll up\-to\-date\fR and touches nothing.
Otherwise it lists the repositories that have updates and lets you refresh all
of them, a chosen subset (by number), or none. Only the repositories you pick
are downloaded; the rest \(em including their cached MANIFEST \(em are left
untouched. The form
.B update gpg
downloads and imports each repository's GPG key into a private keyring, and
should be run once before the first
.BR update .
.TP
.B check-updates
Check every configured repository for pending updates since the last update, one
status line per repo. The official repo is checked via its ChangeLog; external
repos by comparing CHECKSUMS.md5 against the cached copy. Exits 100 if any repo
has updates pending.
.TP
.B show-changelog \fR[\fIREPO\fR]
Page the cached ChangeLog of the official (tracked) repository. Name a
repository to show its ChangeLog instead; if that repository's ChangeLog was
not cached by
.BR update ,
it is fetched on demand.
.SS Querying
.TP
.BI search " NAME"
Find a package by its exact name (case-insensitive), across all repositories,
showing the candidate from the highest-priority repo. Unlike
.BR file-search ,
this does not substring-match: \fIfoo\fR matches only \fIfoo\fR, not
\fIlibfoo\fR or \fIfoobar\fR.
.TP
.BI file-search " FILENAME"
Report which package ships a given file, using the repository MANIFEST. The
MANIFEST is downloaded on first use and can be large.
.TP
.BI info " PACKAGE"
Show the installed version and the available candidates per repository
(highest priority first), with sizes and description.
.TP
.B history \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Print a chronological log of package changes \(em installed, upgraded,
reinstalled and removed, newest first \(em each with its local date and the
source repository or build tag
.B slacker
attributes it to. The log is reconstructed from the pkgtools administrative
directories under
.B ADM_DIR
.RI ( packages/ " and " removed_packages/ ),
so it reflects every change on the system, including those made by other tools
.RB ( slackpkg ", " sbopkg ", " installpkg / upgradepkg / removepkg ),
not just
.BR slacker .
An upgrade reads as \fIold \(-> new\fR; when the successor's record was lost to a
.I removed_packages
name collision the new version is inferred from that package's next known entry.
Name a single package (exact name) to limit the log to it. Options:
.B \-\-installed
(only packages currently installed, with their install date),
.B \-\-removed
(only packages that left the system, removed or upgraded away),
.B \-\-upgraded
(only upgrade and reinstall events),
.BI \-\-last " N"
(only the most recent N events), and
.BI \-\-since " YYYY-MM-DD"
(only events on or after that date). Output is paged when standard output is a
terminal.
.SS Installing and removing
.TP
.BI install " PATTERN..."
Install new packages. Already\-installed packages are refused (use
.B upgrade
or
.B reinstall
instead).
.TP
.BI upgrade " PATTERN..."
Upgrade installed packages to the newest available revision.
.TP
.BI reinstall " PATTERN..."
Reinstall the currently installed version.
.TP
.BI remove " PATTERN..."
Remove installed packages.
.TP
.BI download " PATTERN..."
Download package files without installing them. By default they are saved under
.IR CACHE_DIR/packages/<repo>/ ,
the same place install uses, so a later install reuses them. Pass
.B \-o
.I DIR
(or
.BR \-\-output )
to save elsewhere, e.g.
.I /tmp
or the current directory. Selecting a whole repo or tag (e.g.
.IR @alienbob )
asks for confirmation when more than ten packages would be downloaded.
.TP
.BI revert-pkg " NAME"
Roll an official package back to a previous \-current version (rollback). Lists
that package's earlier versions recorded under
.IR ADM_DIR/removed_packages/ ,
lets you choose one (with
.B \-\-yes
the most recent previous version is taken), then fetches that exact build from
the cumulative archive
.RB ( CUMULATIVE_URL ),
verifies it against the pinned official Slackware GPG key, and downgrades to it
with
.IR "upgradepkg \-\-reinstall" .
Official packages only \(em the cumulative archive does not carry third\-party
repositories \(em and Slackware \-current only: it reads VERSION_CODENAME from 
/etc/os\-release and refuses (fail\-closed) on anything but current, because the 
cumulative archive holds \-current packages that would break a stable release. After a
successful revert it offers to
.B frozen
the package so a later
.B upgrade-all
will not pull it forward again. Requires
.B REVERT
enabled in
.IR slacker.conf .
.SS Bulk operations
.TP
.B upgrade-all
Upgrade every installed package that has a newer revision available.
.TP
.B install-new
Install every package the selected repositories provide that is not already
installed \(em the \(lqfill what's missing\(rq counterpart to
.BR "install @" repo .
By default only the official repo(s); name one or more repositories to use those
instead.
.IP
Because it compares against the live set of installed packages, it offers both
packages newly added to the distribution and packages you had removed \(em
anything the repo ships that you do not currently have \(em and it stays correct
across any number of
.B update
runs. A newer build or version of an installed package is an upgrade, not new, so
it is left to
.BR upgrade-all .
.IP
Like the other install paths it honours source and tag priority (each package is
taken from its highest\-priority source, and a dependency is never pulled from a
repository of lower priority than the one already installed) and the
.B blacklist
\(em frozen packages are skipped and listed as frozen.
.TP
.B upgrade-dist \fR{\fIcurrent\fR|\fIVERSION\fR}
Upgrade the whole system to a different Slackware release \(em a distribution
upgrade. The target is an explicit argument (where you are going), never read
from the mirror:
.I current
moves a stable release to \-current, or give a stable
.I VERSION
(e.g.\&
.IR 15.1 )
to move to a newer stable. The allowed routes are a fail\-closed whitelist
(currently 15.0 \(-> \-current and 15.0 \(-> a newer stable); anything else is
refused. This is a deliberately heavyweight, one\-way operation and is gated by a
typed point\-of\-no\-return confirmation.
.IP
What it does, in order: writes an escape\-kit template of the current package set
first; re\-points the active
.I mirrors
line and every
.B mirror
/
.B subtree
repository to the target release, comments out any third\-party repository whose
versioned URL it cannot re\-point, and backs up then empties the
.IR blacklist ;
refreshes metadata; then upgrades
.I every
installed package to the target's build, bypassing the priority/blacklist/frozen
guards on purpose (a distribution upgrade is exactly when those must not apply).
Core packages (glibc\-solibs, pkgtools, tar, xz, \&...) go first and the GnuPG
verification toolchain goes last, so package signatures keep being checked
throughout. It then runs
.BR install-new ,
.BR clean-system ,
and a second confirming pass, and finishes with a kernel/initrd and bootloader
reminder. Downloads happen in batches that are deleted as they install, so the
upgrade does not need disk for the whole release at once.
.IP
With a
.B DISTRO_UPGRADE_MIRROR
configured (see
.IR distro-upgrade.conf )
the upgrade is driven from a local mirror tree, clone, or mounted ISO instead of
the network.
.B \-\-yes
runs non\-interactively;
.B \-\-dry\-run
shows the whole plan and the URL transform but writes nothing.
.TP
.B clean-system
List installed packages that are no longer part of the official distribution
\(em packages absent from the baseline (the official repo's
.I PACKAGES.TXT
plus any repo marked
.BR immutable )
\(em in a numbered table, then let you choose which to remove: type numbers to
keep, press Enter to remove all, or cancel. This is slackpkg behaviour: a
package the distribution itself dropped is removed even if some third\-party
repo still ships the name. A package is kept (never listed) when any of three
things is true: it is matched by a
.B blacklist
rule; its build tag is listed in
.BR IGNORE_TAGS ;
or it is attributed to an
.B immutable
repository (for a tagged package, the repo that owns its build tag; for a
tagless one, any immutable repo that provides its name). Use these to protect
SBo/local builds and packages from
.IR extra/ ", " testing/ ", " patches/
that you keep installed. As a safety guard slacker refuses to run if a baseline
repo has no metadata loaded (run
.B update
first). With
.B \-\-yes
all listed packages are removed.
.TP
.B clean-cache \fR[\fIREPO\fR...]
Delete downloaded package files from
.IR CACHE_DIR/packages .
Repo metadata and GPG keys (under
.IR CACHE_DIR/repos )
are never touched. Limit to named repos, or clean every repo. Asks before
deleting and reports how much space is freed.
.TP
.B new-config
Reconcile leftover \fI*.new\fR configuration files under /etc and
/usr/share/vim. A \fI.new\fR byte-identical to the installed file is removed
automatically; the rest are presented for resolution. First a single
.I bulk
choice applies to all of them at once, slackpkg\-style:
.RB (K)eep
the current files and leave every \fI.new\fR in place to deal with later,
.RB (O)verwrite
all installed files with the new versions (the old file is saved alongside with
a \fI.orig\fR suffix),
.RB (R)emove
every \fI.new\fR and keep your current files, or
.RB (P)rompt
one by one (the default). When prompting, each file shows a coloured unified
diff against the installed copy and you choose to (K)eep both and decide later,
(O)verwrite the installed file (the old one saved as \fI.orig\fR), (R)emove just
the \fI.new\fR, (M)erge the two with an external tool, or (D)iff again. The merge
tool is
.B vimdiff
by default and may be overridden with the
.B SLACKER_MERGE
environment variable. With
.B \-\-yes
the current configs are kept and the \fI.new\fR files removed, non-interactively.
After
.B upgrade-all
any pending \fI.new\fR files \(em both newly installed and pre-existing \(em are
listed with a reminder to run this command.
.SS Templates
.TP
.BI generate-template " NAME"
Snapshot the installed package set into a template.
.TP
.BI install-template " NAME"
Install every package listed in a template (following includes).
.TP
.BI remove-template " NAME"
Uninstall every package listed in a template (removes packages from the system;
to delete only the template file use
.BR delete-template ).
.TP
.BI delete-template " NAME"
Delete a template file. Installed packages are not touched.
.SS Blacklist
.TP
.BI frozen " RULE..."
Add one or more rules to the blacklist (see
.BR FILES ).
Each argument is a single rule; quote any rule that contains spaces (an
.IR @repo " rule, for instance)."
Rules are validated before being written. A bare
.I @repo
typed without its pattern is reported with a suggested correction. A rule that
parses but looks like a mistake \(em an
.I @repo
naming no active repository, or a plain regex containing whitespace (no package
id has spaces, so this is usually a forgotten
.RB ` @ `
or a quoting slip) \(em is listed together with the active repos, and you are
asked whether to declare it anyway. Rules already present are skipped. Before
anything is written,
.B frozen
prints what each rule will freeze and asks for confirmation;
.B \-\-yes
skips the prompts. Run with no argument to list the current frozen rules.
.TP
.BI unfrozen " RULE..."
Remove one or more rules from the blacklist \(em the counterpart to
.BR frozen .
Each argument must match an existing rule
.IR exactly ,
as a literal string: special characters such as
.IR .* ", " *
or
.I /
are compared verbatim, never interpreted as a pattern, so a partial name can
never match a longer rule and the wrong line is never removed. Run with no
argument to list the current rules. Comment lines, blank lines, and any rule you
did not name are left untouched; a rule that is not found is reported.
.TP
.BI pin " REPO:PACKAGE"
Pin a package to a single repository, ignoring priority \(em the positive
counterpart to
.BR frozen .
After
.RB ` "pin alienbob:vlc" `
every command (including
.BR upgrade-all )
takes
.I vlc
only from
.IR alienbob ,
even when a higher\-priority repo offers a different build. The pin is stored
in the blacklist file as
.RB ` "@alienbob 100% vlc" `.
The repository must be active (a typo is reported with a suggestion); a package
has at most one pin, so pinning it elsewhere replaces the old pin. Pins use an
.I exact
package name, never a pattern. A
.B frozen
rule on the same package always wins over its pin. Run with no argument to list
the current pins.
.TP
.BI unpin " PACKAGE..."
Remove a package's pin, returning it to normal priority\-based resolution \(em
the counterpart to
.BR pin .
Run with no argument to list the current pins.
.SS Repositories
.TP
.B list-repos
List the configured repositories with their priority, effective verify policy,
URL, and how many installed packages slacker attributes to each. Flags are
shown as
.RI ( official ),
.RI ( immutable ),
.RI ( subtree ),
and a quarantine marker when a repo is frozen.
.TP
.B status
Health\-check the whole setup and report whether slacker is correctly
configured and what to do next: active mirror and whether it is up to date with
the upstream master, repos and priorities, verification policy, imported/pinned
GPG keys, metadata freshness, whether every repository targets the same
Slackware release as the running system, blacklist, the sources of installed
packages, and
\(em when online \(em reachability and pending updates. When your mirror is more
than 48 hours behind upstream it says so and points you at
.BR find-mirror .
.TP
.B find-mirror
Probe the official Slackware mirror list and suggest the fastest, up\-to\-date
mirror for your location. Each https mirror's
.I slackware64\-current/PACKAGES.TXT
is fetched with one timed range request \(em which measures real HTTP latency and
reads the mirror's own timestamp at the same time \(em so mirrors more than 48
hours behind the upstream master are dropped as stale, and the reachable, fresh
ones are ranked by speed. The 7 fastest are listed and the 3 fastest are proposed
as lines to make active in your
.I mirrors
file; slacker never changes your mirror for you. Like
.BR status ,
this runs before any mirror is configured, so it can be used for the very first
setup. It works on
.B \-current
and on a stable release (and on 32\-bit).
.SS Managing repositories
.TP
.B add-repo \fIPRIORITY NAME URL\fR [\fIflags\fR]
Append a binary repository to the
.I repos
file. The URL must be
.IR http:// " or " https://
and not already in use. Optional flags (separate words, any order):
.BR official ", " immutable ", " subtree ", and " verify= gpg,md5,...
The line is validated and, on confirmation, the repo is fetched and vetted (see
.BR "Repository safety" ).
.TP
.B del-repo \fINAME\fR
Remove a binary repository (by name) from the
.I repos
file.
.TP
.B pri-repo \fIPRIORITY NAME\fR
Change the priority of an existing repository in the
.I repos
file.
.I NAME
must be an active repo (the closest match is suggested on a typo), and
.I PRIORITY
must not already be used by another repo \(em priorities are kept distinct, and
the offending repo is named if it clashes. Only that line's priority field is
rewritten; its URL and flags are left untouched.
.TP
.B add-tag \fIPRIORITY NAME TAG\fR
Append a build\-tag priority line (e.g.
.IR "add-tag 100 SBo _SBo" ).
.TP
.B del-tag \fITAG\fR
Remove a build\-tag priority line by its tag.
.SS Repository safety
.TP
.B vet-repo \fINAME\fR
Re\-run slacker's safety vetting on a repo on demand (fetches metadata only):
it quarantines the repo if it fails, or clears a prior quarantine if it now
passes.
.TP
.B trust-repo \fINAME\fR
Lift the quarantine on a repo so it can be used again. This overrides slacker's
safety verdict, at your own responsibility.
.TP
.B distrust-repo \fINAME\fR
Manually quarantine (freeze) a repo so it provides no packages until you
.B trust-repo
it again.
.SH PRIVILEGES
Read-only commands
.RB ( search ", " info ", " file-search ", " check-updates ", " show-changelog ", " history )
run as any user. Commands that change the system, the cache, or the
configuration (everything else) must be run as root; non-root invocations stop
with a clear message before doing anything.
.PP
Those same commands take an exclusive lock
.RI ( /run/slacker.lock )
so only one runs at a time; a second one exits immediately reporting the running
PID. The lock is held by the kernel and released automatically if slacker exits,
crashes, or is killed, so it never gets stuck. Queries take no lock and run
freely in parallel.
.SH PATTERNS
A
.I PATTERN
may be an exact package name, a substring of a package name, a Slackware series
name
.RB ( a ", " ap ", " d ", " k ", " kde ", " l ", " n ", " t ", " x ", " xap ", " xfce ", " y ", " ...),
or a
.I repo:name
pin that forces a specific repository regardless of priority.
.PP
Two explicit set selectors are also accepted (the @ is required, so a bare word
is never treated as a repo):
.TP
.BI @ repo
For
.B install
and
.BR download ,
every package available in that repo, e.g.
.I @gnome
to install a whole desktop repo. For commands acting on installed packages
.RB ( upgrade ", " reinstall ", " remove )
it means every installed package whose build tag belongs to that repo \(em the
packages actually built from it \(em so a same\-named package installed from
another source is left untouched.
.TP
.BI @ _tag
Every package carrying that build tag, e.g.
.I @_SBo
to remove all installed SlackBuilds.org packages.
.SH FILES
All configuration is plain text under
.I /etc/slacker
(overridable with
.BR \-\-config\-dir ).
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/slacker.conf
Global settings as
.IR KEY=value .
.B ARCH
is auto\-detected from the installed
.I aaa_base
package and need only be set to force a specific architecture.
.B CACHE_DIR
(default
.IR /var/cache/slacker )
holds downloaded metadata and packages.
.B ADM_DIR
(default
.IR /var/adm )
is the Slackware pkgtools administrative root \(em the directory holding
.IR packages/ ", " removed_packages/ ", " scripts/ " and " setup/ ;
the
.B history
command reads it.
.B PKG_DB_DIR
(default
.IR ADM_DIR/packages )
is the installed\-package database; set it explicitly only to override that
derived location.
.B VERIFY
(default
.IR all )
sets the package verification policy.
With
.IR all ,
a GPG signature is verified when present (a bad signature always fails), and at
least one integrity checksum (md5 or sha) must be present and match; if neither
md5 nor sha is available, installation stops. A comma list such as
.I gpg,md5,sha
REQUIRES those methods: if one is absent slacker stops and explains how to relax
it.
.I none
disables verification. Override per repo with a
.I verify=
flag on the repos line \(em useful when a repo ships a broken or missing
checksum or signature.
.TP
.B RESOLVE_DEPS
(default
.IR yes )
controls whether
.I .dep
files are read to pull in dependencies.
.B IGNORE_TAGS
is a space\-separated list of build tags (e.g.
.IR "_SBo cf alien" )
that
.B clean-system
must not treat as foreign \(em for packages from sources not managed as binary
repositories.
.B MAX_PARALLEL
(default
.IR 4 ,
clamped to 1\(en16; 1 = serial)
sets how many packages are downloaded concurrently during
.BR install ", " upgrade ", " upgrade-all " and " download .
A download or verification that fails is skipped and reported rather than
aborting the rest; a package that fails its GPG or checksum check is never
installed.
.B REVERT
(default
.IR on )
enables the
.B revert-pkg
command, and
.B CUMULATIVE_URL
(default
.IR https://slackware.uk/cumulative/slackware64-current )
is the cumulative \-current archive it fetches superseded official packages from
\(em a revert\-only source, never consulted by
.BR update ", " upgrade ", " install " or " check-updates ,
so its historical packages never enter the priority model.
.PP
The
.I repos
file may also contain
.B build\-tag priority
lines of the form
.IR "priority name tag" ,
where the third field is a build tag rather than a URL (e.g.
.IR "100 SBo _SBo" ).
These assign a priority to packages built from non\-binary sources
(SlackBuilds.org, local builds).
.BR upgrade ", " reinstall " and " upgrade-all
only replace such a package with a candidate from a repository of higher or
equal priority, so tagged packages are never silently migrated to a lower repo
or downgraded. Only an explicit
.I repo:name
pin overrides this and forces the chosen repository's build.
.PP
When an
.BR install ,
.BR upgrade ,
or
.B reinstall
pattern matches more than one package, slacker prints a numbered list and lets
you choose which to act on (Enter for all, numbers or ranges such as
.I 1 3 5
or
.IR 2-4 ,
or
.I n
to cancel). A series name (a, ap, kde, y, ...) matches exactly that series
rather than every package whose name contains those letters.
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/mirrors
Catalogue of official Slackware mirrors. Exactly one line must be uncommented;
.B slacker
errors out if two are active. Supports
.IR http:// ", " https:// " and " file:// "."
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/repos
Repository priorities, names and external repositories, one per line as
.IR "priority name url" " [" official "] [" immutable "] [" subtree "] [" verify= ...].
Higher priority wins. The URL field may be a literal URL, the keyword
.B mirror
(filled in from the active line in
.IR mirrors ,
used for the official repo), or
.BI mirror/ subpath
\(em the active mirror with a subpath appended (e.g.\&
.IR mirror/extra ", " mirror/testing ", " mirror/patches )
so a distribution subtree follows whichever mirror is active without the host
being hardcoded; combine it with
.BR subtree .
.B immutable
keeps every package attributed to the repo out of
.BR clean-system .
.B subtree
marks a Slackware distribution subtree
.RI ( extra/ ", " patches/ ", " testing/ ", " pasture/ )
whose
.I PACKAGES.TXT
lists package locations relative to the distribution root; its packages and
.I GPG-KEY
are fetched from the parent (root) URL while its metadata comes from the repo
URL itself.
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/blacklist
Blacklist rules, one per line (`#` comments). A rule is
.RI [ @repo "] " PATTERN ,
where
.I PATTERN
is a Slackware series when it ends in
.RB ` / `
(e.g.\&
.IR kde/ ),
otherwise an unanchored regular expression matched against the full package id
.RI ( name\-version\-arch\-build ),
exactly like slackpkg \(em so
.I xf86\-.*\-202.*
catches a 202x build and a bare
.I vlc
matches any id containing
.IR vlc ;
anchor with
.RI ^ \&...\& $
for an exact match. The optional
.I @repo
prefix scopes the rule to one repository: for an available package its candidate
repo, for an installed package its source. An installed package that matches is
frozen (never changed); an uninstalled match is hidden from
.BR install\-new ,
upgrades and
.BR check\-updates ,
but still shown by
.B search
and
.B info
marked
.IR [blacklisted] .
The same file also holds
.IR pins .
A line of the form
.RI @repo \" 100% \" PACKAGE
(written by
.BR pin )
is the opposite of a freeze: it forces
.I PACKAGE
to be taken only from
.IR repo ,
ignoring priority, for every command. A freeze on a package always wins over a
pin on it.
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/distro-upgrade.conf
Optional. Sets
.B DISTRO_UPGRADE_MIRROR
to a local source for
.BR upgrade-dist :
a local copy of the target release tree (\fIfile://\fR or \fIhttp://\fR), an NFS
clone, or a mounted installation ISO. When set, the distribution upgrade is
driven from this source instead of the network; slacker validates that it
matches the requested target and is reachable before the point of no return.
Absent or empty, \fIupgrade-dist\fR uses the configured mirrors as usual.
.TP
.I /etc/slacker/templates/
Generated and user\-created template files.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
When a package in a repository is accompanied by a
.I .dep
file (sharing the package's name with a
.I .dep
extension), each line of that file names a dependency package.
.B slacker
reads it and, before installing the package, pulls in any missing dependencies
from the
.I same
repository, recursively. Dependencies already satisfied by the same
repository's build are left alone. A dependency that is installed but differs
from what the repository offers (for example installed from another source) is
handled by source priority. If the installed copy comes from a
.I lower\-priority
source it triggers a prompt:
.IR skip ", " replace ", " skip\-all " or " abort .
If it comes from a source of
.I higher\-or\-equal
priority it is kept by the priority rule \(em but
.B slacker
now lists every such dependency and lets you
.I keep
each (the default) or
.I replace
it with the version the repository being installed offers.
With
.B \-\-yes
the installed version is kept. The whole mechanism is on by default and can be
disabled with
.B RESOLVE_DEPS=no
or, per run, with
.BR \-\-no\-deps .
This applies to every command that installs packages
.RB ( install ", " upgrade ", " reinstall ", " upgrade-all ", " install-new ", "
.BR install-template ).
.SH SECURITY
When a repository GPG key has been imported with
.BR "update gpg" ,
.B slacker
verifies CHECKSUMS.md5 against its detached signature on every
.BR update .
If that signature is bad or its key is missing, the repository is not aborted
wholesale: slacker warns, discards that repo's freshly\-fetched metadata so it
is never used unverified, and continues with the other repositories. It then
tells you how to proceed if you trust the repo anyway (relax its
.I verify=
in the repos file, or import its key) and re\-run.
.PP
Before installation each package is checked according to the repo's policy: its
md5 (and sha when provided) from the signature\-verified CHECKSUMS, and \(em when
the policy includes gpg \(em its own detached
.I .txz.asc
signature, which most Slackware repositories ship per package. A bad per\-package
signature is fatal. Under
.I all
a missing per\-package signature falls back to the checksum; under an explicit
.I gpg
it is required.
.PP
If any active repository ends up with no verification at all (global
.B VERIFY=none
with no per\-repo override, or an explicit
.IR verify=none ),
.B slacker
prints a warning after
.B update
and in
.B check-updates
naming those repositories. This applies to
.I file://
repositories as well.
.PP
.B Key pinning (trust on first use).
The first time a repository's
.I GPG-KEY
is imported, slacker pins its fingerprint. On every later import the fetched key
must match the pinned one; a changed or substituted key is refused as a possible
attack rather than trusted silently. (For a
.B subtree
repo the key is fetched from the parent/root URL, where Slackware keeps the one
key that signs the whole tree.)
.PP
.B Quarantine and trust.
A repository that fails vetting \(em unreachable, or serving metadata that looks
malformed or hostile \(em is put into quarantine and provides no packages until
you act. A freshly added or as\-yet\-untrusted repo is light\-vetted on the next
.BR update ;
.B add-repo
and
.B vet-repo
run a thorough vet. Use
.B trust-repo
to lift a quarantine you judge a false positive (overriding the verdict at your
own responsibility),
.B distrust-repo
to freeze a repo yourself, and
.B vet-repo
to re\-check on demand. Quarantine state is shown by
.B list-repos
and
.BR status .
.PP
.B Release matching.
A GPG or checksum signature authenticates
.I who
built a package, not
.I "which Slackware release"
it targets, so a repository left pointing at the wrong release (for example a
\-current third\-party repo still active on a 15.0 system) can authenticate
cleanly yet install packages that break the system. Before any install or
upgrade,
.B slacker
therefore refuses a package whose source repository targets a different release
than the running system, naming the offenders;
.B status
reports the same mismatch. Pass
.B \-\-yes
to override when you are sure. A distribution upgrade
.RB ( upgrade-dist )
changes the release on purpose and is not subject to this guard.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred.
.TP
.B 20
No package was found to act on.
.TP
.B 50
.B slacker
upgraded itself and must be re\-run.
.TP
.B 100
There are pending updates (from
.BR check-updates ).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SLACKER_MERGE
External merge tool invoked by
.B new-config
for the (M)erge action, called as \fItool installed-file file.new\fR. Defaults
to
.BR vimdiff .
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set (to any value), all coloured output is disabled. Colour is also
suppressed automatically when standard output is not a terminal.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
First\-time setup: choose a mirror in
.IR /etc/slacker/mirrors ,
then:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker update gpg
slacker update
.fi
.RE
.PP
Find and install a package:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker search firefox
slacker install mozilla-firefox
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force a package from a specific repository:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker install alienbob:vlc
.fi
.RE
.PP
Upgrade the whole system:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker update
slacker install-new
slacker upgrade-all
slacker clean-system
.fi
.RE
.PP
See what changed recently, or for one package:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker history --last 20
slacker history emacs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Roll a package back to a previous \-current version:
.PP
.RS
.nf
slacker revert-pkg emacs
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR slackpkg (8),
.BR installpkg (8),
.BR upgradepkg (8),
.BR removepkg (8),
.BR pkgtool (8)
.PP
Full documentation, guides and examples are maintained in the project wiki:
.UR https://forge.slackware.nl/rizitis/slacker/wiki
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
Ioannis Anagnostakis (rizitis)
.SH LICENSE
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
.UR https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.UE .
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed
under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR
CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
